course-assignments.md, before:

---
layout: subpage
title: Course Assignments
image: css/nd-logo.png
home: true
subpage: false
---

## Student Presentation of Ethical Framework (30 Points) <a name="framework-presentation"></a>
### Purpose:
+ Learn the fundamentals of your assigned ethical framework.
+ Meet and work with your ethical framework group for the first time.
+ Help your fellow students learn about your ethical framework.

### Instructions:
+ Put together a slide deck of up to 10 slides and submit it as a PDF to the instructor via email.
+ Give a 10 minute presentation of your slides as a group with 2 minutes of questions after.
+ How you divide the work and presentation is up to your group, but remember:
  + Everyone must participate in the assignment in some way.
  + Your group presentation will last only 10 minutes.

### Due Date:
+ Your slides are due when class starts (15:30) on 01/22/2019.

### Requirements:
+ Your slides must include:
  + A brief introductory slide describing the historical origin of the ethical framework. (5 Points)
  + A slide explaining the connection between the philosopher shown in your framework webpage to the framework. (5 Points)
  + An introduction and discussion of *three* core concepts of the ethical framework. (10 Points)
  + An introduction and discussion of *at least* one foundational written work in the ethical framework (you do not have to read the full work). (5 Points)
  + A brief example of how your ethical framework would evaluate a developer accidentally introducing a critical bug into a popular mobile app. (5 Points)

## Website Post 1 (60 Points) <a name="website-post-1">
### Purpose:
+ Discuss among your group and share with the class the general outlook of your assigned ethical framework.
+ Note similarities and differences between your ethical framework and the three codes of ethics in the [assigned readings](course-readings#codes-of-ethics "Codes of Ethics in Computer Science").
+ Get accustomed to the technical aspects of GitHub Pages and flex your HTML/CSS/Markdown muscles.

### Instructions:
+ One person in your group should fork the course [GitHub repository](https://github.com/nkremerh/ethical-computing-institute "GitHub Repository") which hosts the course website on GitHub Pages.
  + Make your commits to this fork, then make a pull request to the original repository to submit your assignment.
  + Be sure to watch out for merge conflicts! You should only be editing your ethical framework page.
  + Added style and flair is appreciated. Remember, your peers will be able to look at your page!
+ Familiarize yourself with GitHub Pages (including using Jekyll and Markdown to create webpages).
  + Look for tutorials online for help (like [this one](http://24ways.org/2013/get-started-with-github-pages/ "GitHub Pages Tutorial"))! If you are entirely new to GitHub or HTML/CSS/Markdown, please feel free to visit office hours.
+ Write a general statement of purpose for your ethical framework as it relates to ethical and professional issues in computer science.
+ Write a response to *each* of the three codes of ethics detailing the similarities and differences between them and your statement of purpose.
+ The general statement and each of the three codes of ethics responses should be distinctly separate on the webpage.

### Due Date:
+ Your pull request to the original GitHub repository is due when class starts (15:30) on 01/24/2019.
  + Remember this GitHub repository is public. Keep your commit messages appropriate.

### Requirements:
+ Your statement of purpose (~700 Words) must include:
  + A description of what makes an action ethical according to your framework. (5 Points)
  + With regard to your framework, an answer to the question: What triggers the need to evaluate how ethical an action is? (5 Points)
  + Discuss the predisposition people have to act ethically according to your framework (if this is not stated, explain why that may be). (5 Points)
  + A brief summary of three issues in computer technology you believe your ethical framework would have a lot to say about (these do not necessarily have to be topics covered in class). (10 Points)
+ Each of the three codes of ethics responses (~300 Words) must:
  + Briefly summarize the similarities between the code of ethics and your ethical framework. (4 Points)
  + Briefly summarize the differences between the code of ethics and your ethical framework. (4 Points)
  + State something that is *missing* from the code of ethics which your ethical framework can provide. (2 Point)
+ The webpage is well-formatted, readable, and without merge conflicts in the GitHub repository (style points). (5 Points)

## Website Post 2 (60 Points) <a name="website-post-2">
### Purpose:
+ Identify diversity issues in computer science.
+ Identify different perspectives regarding the availability of H-1B visas.
+ Discuss the perspective of your ethical framework as it applies to the above two issues.

### Instructions:
+ Use the fork of the course GitHub repository you set up in [Website Post 1](course-assignments#website-post-1) to commit your Git changes.
  + Make a pull request to the original repository by the due date.
+ Write a summary and response to the controversy surrounding H-1B visas.
+ Write a response to the [Google internal memo](https://gizmodo.com/exclusive-heres-the-full-10-page-anti-diversity-screed-1797564320 "The Full 10-Page Anti-Diversity Screed Circulating Internally at Google").
+ Write an analysis of gender bias issues in tech.
+ Write an analysis of race and ethnicity issues in tech.

### Due Date:
+ Your pull request to the original GitHub repository is due when class starts (15:30) on 01/31/2019.

### Requirements:
+ Your summary and response (~1,000 Words) must include:
  + A brief summary of arguments *in favor* of the H-1B visa system. (5 Points)
  + A brief summary of arguments *in opposition* to the the H-1B visa system. (5 Points)
  + A response containing insights your ethical framework may provide to the controversy. (10 Points)
+ Your response to the [Google internal memo](https://gizmodo.com/exclusive-heres-the-full-10-page-anti-diversity-screed-1797564320 "The Full 10-Page Anti-Diversity Screed Circulating Internally at Google") (~500 Words) must include:
  + A brief summary of the content of the memo. (5 Points)
  + A discussion of the aspects in the memo your ethical framework finds either valid or ethical. (5 Points)
  + A discussion of the aspects in the memo your ethical framework finds either invalid or unethical. (5 Points)
+ Your analysis of gender bias in tech (~500 Words) must include:
  + A brief summary of outstanding gender issues in tech. (5 Points)
  + A response to each issue from the perspective of your ethical framework. (5 Points)
    + If your framework does not have any particular insight for an issue, provide your own while matching the sentiments of your framework as best as you can.
+ Your analysis of race and ethinicity biases in tech (~500 Words) must include:
  + A brief summary of outstanding race and ethnicity issues in tech. (5 Points)
  + A response to each issue from the perspective of your ethical framework. (5 Points)
    + If your framework does not have any particular insight for an issue, provide your own while matching the sentiments of your framework as best as you can.
+ The webpage is well-formatted, readable, and without merge conflicts in the GitHub repository (style points). (5 Points)

Commit message:

Adds three new ethical frameworks Adds clarifications to group work expectations in assignments Adds distinguishing between course and framework pages

course-assignments.md, after:

---
layout: subpage
title: Course Assignments
image: css/nd-logo.png
home: true
subpage: false
coursepage: true
---

## Student Presentation of Ethical Framework (30 Points) <a name="framework-presentation"></a>
### Purpose:
+ Learn the fundamentals of your assigned ethical framework.
+ Meet and work with your ethical framework group for the first time.
+ Help your fellow students learn about your ethical framework.

### Instructions:
+ Put together a slide deck of up to 10 slides and submit it as a PDF to the instructor via email.
+ Give a 10 minute presentation of your slides as a group with 2 minutes of questions after.
+ Because your group will have 8-10 people, it may be smart to divide up the work.
  + How you divide the work and presentation is up to your group, but remember: your group presentation will last only 10 minutes.
  + One way of doing this is to have half your group focus on creating and presenting slides while the other half proofreads, then switch off so the other half of the group does the heavy lifting for the *next* assignment and so on.
  + Even if a group member is not responsible for putting together the slides, make sure everyone is on the same page regarding what your ethical framework is all about.

### Due Date:
+ Your slides are due when class starts (15:30) on 01/22/2019.

### Requirements:
+ Your slides must include:
  + A brief introductory slide describing the historical origin of the ethical framework. (5 Points)
  + A slide explaining the connection between the philosopher shown in your framework webpage to the framework. (5 Points)
  + An introduction and discussion of *three* core concepts of the ethical framework. (10 Points)
  + An introduction and discussion of *at least* one foundational written work in the ethical framework (you do not have to read the full work). (5 Points)
  + A brief example of how your ethical framework would evaluate a developer accidentally introducing a critical bug into a popular mobile app. (5 Points)

## Website Post 1 (60 Points) <a name="website-post-1">
### Purpose:
+ Discuss among your group and share with the class the general outlook of your assigned ethical framework.
+ Note similarities and differences between your ethical framework and the three codes of ethics in the [assigned readings](course-readings#codes-of-ethics "Codes of Ethics in Computer Science").
+ Get accustomed to the technical aspects of GitHub Pages and flex your HTML/CSS/Markdown muscles.

### Instructions:
+ One person in your group should fork the course [GitHub repository](https://github.com/nkremerh/ethical-computing-institute "GitHub Repository") which hosts the course website on GitHub Pages.
  + Make your commits to this fork, then make a pull request to the original repository to submit your assignment.
  + Be sure to watch out for merge conflicts! You should only be editing your ethical framework page.
  + Added style and flair is appreciated. Remember, your peers will be able to look at your page!
+ Familiarize yourself with GitHub Pages (including using Jekyll and Markdown to create webpages).
  + Look for tutorials online for help (like [this one](http://24ways.org/2013/get-started-with-github-pages/ "GitHub Pages Tutorial"))! If you are entirely new to GitHub or HTML/CSS/Markdown, please feel free to visit office hours.
+ Write a general statement of purpose for your ethical framework as it relates to ethical and professional issues in computer science.
+ Write a response to *each* of the three codes of ethics detailing the similarities and differences between them and your statement of purpose.
+ The general statement and each of the three codes of ethics responses should be distinctly separate on the webpage.

### Due Date:
+ Your pull request to the original GitHub repository is due when class starts (15:30) on 01/24/2019.
  + Remember this GitHub repository is public. Keep your commit messages appropriate.

### Requirements:
+ Your statement of purpose (~700 Words) must include:
  + A description of what makes an action ethical according to your framework. (5 Points)
  + With regard to your framework, an answer to the question: What triggers the need to evaluate how ethical an action is? (5 Points)
  + Discuss the predisposition people have to act ethically according to your framework (if this is not stated, explain why that may be). (5 Points)
  + A brief summary of three issues in computer technology you believe your ethical framework would have a lot to say about (these do not necessarily have to be topics covered in class). (10 Points)
+ Each of the three codes of ethics responses (~300 Words) must:
  + Briefly summarize the similarities between the code of ethics and your ethical framework. (4 Points)
  + Briefly summarize the differences between the code of ethics and your ethical framework. (4 Points)
  + State something that is *missing* from the code of ethics which your ethical framework can provide. (2 Point)
+ The webpage is well-formatted, readable, and without merge conflicts in the GitHub repository (style points). (5 Points)

## Website Post 2 (60 Points) <a name="website-post-2">
### Purpose:
+ Identify diversity issues in computer science.
+ Identify different perspectives regarding the availability of H-1B visas.
+ Discuss the perspective of your ethical framework as it applies to the above two issues.

### Instructions:
+ Use the fork of the course GitHub repository you set up in [Website Post 1](course-assignments#website-post-1) to commit your Git changes.
  + Make a pull request to the original repository by the due date.
+ Write a summary and response to the controversy surrounding H-1B visas.
+ Write a response to the [Google internal memo](https://gizmodo.com/exclusive-heres-the-full-10-page-anti-diversity-screed-1797564320 "The Full 10-Page Anti-Diversity Screed Circulating Internally at Google").
+ Write an analysis of gender bias issues in tech.
+ Write an analysis of race and ethnicity issues in tech.

### Due Date:
+ Your pull request to the original GitHub repository is due when class starts (15:30) on 01/31/2019.

### Requirements:
+ Your summary and response (~1,000 Words) must include:
  + A brief summary of arguments *in favor* of the H-1B visa system. (5 Points)
  + A brief summary of arguments *in opposition* to the the H-1B visa system. (5 Points)
  + A response containing insights your ethical framework may provide to the controversy. (10 Points)
+ Your response to the [Google internal memo](https://gizmodo.com/exclusive-heres-the-full-10-page-anti-diversity-screed-1797564320 "The Full 10-Page Anti-Diversity Screed Circulating Internally at Google") (~500 Words) must include:
  + A brief summary of the content of the memo. (5 Points)
  + A discussion of the aspects in the memo your ethical framework finds either valid or ethical. (5 Points)
  + A discussion of the aspects in the memo your ethical framework finds either invalid or unethical. (5 Points)
+ Your analysis of gender bias in tech (~500 Words) must include:
  + A brief summary of outstanding gender issues in tech. (5 Points)
  + A response to each issue from the perspective of your ethical framework. (5 Points)
    + If your framework does not have any particular insight for an issue, provide your own while matching the sentiments of your framework as best as you can.
+ Your analysis of race and ethinicity biases in tech (~500 Words) must include:
  + A brief summary of outstanding race and ethnicity issues in tech. (5 Points)
  + A response to each issue from the perspective of your ethical framework. (5 Points)
    + If your framework does not have any particular insight for an issue, provide your own while matching the sentiments of your framework as best as you can.
+ The webpage is well-formatted, readable, and without merge conflicts in the GitHub repository (style points). (5 Points)
